\thispagestyle{empty}

\begin{center}
    \textbf{\Large Summary}
\end{center}

In an era where ecological issues are becoming increasingly complex and
globalized, the integration of data-driven methodologies into ecological
research offers unprecedented opportunities for addressing these challenges.
The last part of this thesis explores the application of such methodologies to
study global ecological problems related to coastal marine ecosystems: the
decline of coral reefs, the acidification of coastal waters, and the loss of
seagrass meadows. Coral reefs are among the most biodiverse ecosystems on
Earth, providing essential services to marine life and coastal communities.
However, they are threatened by a combination of human activities and climate
change, which have led to widespread coral bleaching events and the loss of
coral cover. The acidification of coastal waters is another pressing issue
posing significant risks to marine life, particularly species that rely on
calcium carbonate for their skeletal structures like coral reefs. Seagrass
meadows are also under threat from human activities, such as coastal
development and pollution, which have led to the loss of seagrass habitats and
the decline of associated biodiversity. The understanding of the spatiotemporal
dynamics of these ecosystems together with the monitoring of their health and
factors affecting their resilience is crucial for effective conservation and
management strategies. However, this is often challenging due to the complexity
of these ecosystems and the difficulty of collecting data at the necessary
spatial and temporal scales. By leveraging large existing datasets, machine
learning algorithms, and spatial analysis, here we provide novel insights
into the spatial properties of coral reefs, the reconstruction of pH
time-series in coastal waters, and the mapping of seagrass meadows from
satellite imagery. These case studies exemplify the potential of data-driven
approaches to enhance our understanding of ecological dynamics, improve
environmental monitoring, and inform conservation strategies.